Back pain
Back pain, particularly lower back pain, is very common. It usually improves within a few weeks but can sometimes last longer or keep coming back. There are things you can do to help ease the pain.
Causes of back pain
Back pain can have many causes. It's not always obvious what causes it, and it often gets better on its own.
A common cause of back pain is an injury like a pulled muscle (
strain
).
Sometimes, medical conditions like a
slipped disc
,
sciatica
(a trapped nerve) or
ankylosing spondylitis
can cause back pain.
Very rarely, back pain can be a sign of a serious problem such as a broken bone, cancer or an infection.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
You have back pain and:
it does not improve after treating it at home for a few weeks
it's stopping you doing your day-to-day activities
you're worried about the pain or you're struggling to cope
you've lost weight without trying to
there's a lump or swelling in your back, or your back has changed shape
it does not improve after resting or is worse at night
it's worse when sneezing, coughing or pooing
it's coming from the top of your back (between your shoulders), rather than your lower back
Information:
Refer yourself for back or joint
help
In many areas you may be able to get help, such as physiotherapy, from NHS community musculoskeletal (MSK) services without needing a referral from a GP.
Get NHS help for back or joint problems
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from 111 if:
You have back pain and:
you feel hot, cold, shivery or generally unwell
it's severe pain that starts suddenly, or it's getting worse quickly
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
You have back pain and:
pain, tingling, weakness or numbness in both legs
a loss of feeling around your genitals or anus
changes in your bladder or bowels, such as difficulty peeing, or peeing or pooing yourself
changes in how your penis or vagina feels during sex, not being able to get or keep an erection, or not being able to orgasm
chest pain
it started after a serious accident, such as a car accident
Information:
Do not drive to A&E. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.
Bring any medicines you take with you.
How to ease back pain yourself
Back pain often improves on its own within a few weeks. There are things you can do to help speed up your recovery.
Do
stay active and try to continue with your daily activities
take anti-inflammatory medicine like
ibuprofen
(these may not be suitable for everyone) – paracetamol on its own is not recommended for back pain but it may be used with another painkiller
check with a pharmacist or GP if you're unsure about which painkiller is suitable for you
use an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a tea towel to reduce pain and swelling
use a heat pack (or hot water bottle) wrapped in a tea towel to relieve joint stiffness or muscle spasms
try doing some exercises and stretches for back pain
Don't
do not stay in bed for long periods of time
Exercises and stretches for back pain
There are specific exercises and stretches you can do to help with back pain. But stop if your pain gets worse and see a GP for advice.
Video: Back stretches
In this video, a physiotherapist shows some simple back stretches to help prevent aches and pains.
Media last reviewed: 16 November 2023
Media review due: 16 November 2026
Other places to find back pain exercises include:
NHS back pain pilates video workout
Chartered Society of Physiotherapy: video exercises for back pain
Activities like walking, swimming, yoga and pilates may also help ease back pain.
Treatments for back pain
If your back pain is severe or not getting better, you may prescribed painkillers.
Other treatments may be recommended if your pain does not get better after a few weeks.
These include:
group exercise sessions and
physiotherapy
manual therapy – where a trained therapist massages and moves the muscles, bones and joints in your back
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
to help you cope with the pain
a procedure to seal off some of the nerves in your back so they stop sending pain signals (only for long-term lower back pain)
If your back pain is caused by a medical condition like a slipped disc and other treatments have not helped, surgery may be an option.
Page last reviewed: 05 March 2026
Next review due: 05 March 2029