Diabetes
Diabetes is a condition that causes your blood glucose (sugar) level to become too high.
Types of diabetes
Common types of diabetes and who they affect
Type of diabetes
Who it affects
Type 1 diabetes
Often diagnosed in childhood, but you can get it at any age.
It cannot be prevented.
Type 2 diabetes
Some people are at higher risk due to ethnicity, age, living with obesity or overweight.
It can sometimes be prevented or stopped with lifestyle changes and treatment.
Gestational diabetes
Can happen during pregnancy.
You can reduce your risk with lifestyle changes. Gestational diabetes usually goes away after you've given birth.
Information:
Other types of diabetes
Find out about other types of diabetes on the Diabetes UK website
Symptoms of diabetes
The most common symptoms of diabetes are:
feeling thirsty all the time
peeing more than usual
feeling very tired
losing weight without trying
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you or your child has any symptoms of diabetes
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
. Call 111 if you're asking about a child under 5 years old.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you or your child:
have a higher risk of developing diabetes
Not everyone with diabetes has symptoms, so it's important to get checked out.
Causes of diabetes
Diabetes is caused by your body not making enough or any of a hormone called insulin, or the insulin not working properly (insulin resistance).
Insulin helps your body use glucose (sugar) for energy. Without it, the level of glucose in your blood becomes too high.
It's not possible to prevent type 1 diabetes because it's usually caused by a problem with your immune system (autoimmune condition).
You may be more likely to get type 2 or gestational diabetes because of your weight, age, ethnicity, or if other people in your family have it.
You can sometimes reduce your risk of getting type 2 and gestational diabetes by making lifestyle changes such as:
eating a balanced diet
exercising regularly
maintaining a healthy weight
Pre-diabetes (non-diabetic hyperglycaemia)
Some people have blood glucose (sugar) levels above the normal range but not high enough to be diagnosed as having diabetes. This is known as pre-diabetes or non-diabetic hyperglycaemia.
People with pre-diabetes are at greater risk of developing type 2 diabetes, but the risk can be reduced through lifestyle changes.
If you have pre-diabetes, you may be eligible for the
NHS Diabetes Prevention Programme
. This helps people make lifestyle changes and has been shown to help prevent type 2 diabetes.
Treatment for diabetes
The treatment you'll have depends on the type of diabetes you have. You'll be treated by a specialist diabetes team in hospital or at your GP surgery.
Type 1 diabetes treatment
includes taking a medicine called
insulin
for the rest of your life, and regularly checking your blood glucose (sugar) levels.
Type 2 diabetes treatment
and
gestational diabetes treatment
includes lifestyle changes such as eating healthily, exercising and trying to lose weight, and sometimes medicines, such as
metformin
or insulin.
Long-term complications of diabetes
Having diabetes can increase your chance of getting other health problems, including:
heart attack and stroke
kidney problems
nerve damage and foot problems – diabetes can cause damage to nerves (
peripheral neuropathy
)
sight problems – adults and children aged 12 or over will be
offered
diabetic eye screening
every 1 to 2 years
gum disease
Complications can develop over time and are linked to high blood glucose (sugar) levels. Managing your blood glucose well and keeping to your agreed target level can lower your chances of getting complications.
Page last reviewed: 26 June 2025
Next review due: 26 June 2028