Joint pain
Joint pain is common, especially as you get older. There are things you can do to ease the pain, but get medical help if it's very painful or it does not get better.
Types of joint pain
Common types of joint pain include:
knee pain
shoulder pain
hip pain
foot pain
, including your ankle and toes
hand pain,
including your wrist and fingers
elbow and arm pain
neck pain
You might feel pain in one joint, or more than one joint at the same time, such as your knees and hips.
Causes of joint pain
There are many possible causes of joint pain. It might be caused by an injury or a longer-lasting problem such as arthritis.
Perimenopause and menopause can also cause aching and painful joints due to lowered levels of oestrogen.
Do not self-diagnose, see a GP if you're worried.
Possible causes of joint pain
Symptoms
Possible cause
Pain, swelling or bruising after intense or repetitive exercise
Sprain or strain
Pain that's worse when walking and stiffness after activity (usually over the age of 45)
Osteoarthritis
Warm, swollen joint that's more painful when you move it or press on it
Bursitis
Pain and stiffness felt in both sides of your body that's worse after not moving (for example, when you wake up)
Rheumatoid arthritis
Hot, swollen toe joint (usually the big toe) with very bad pain that comes on suddenly, often overnight
Gout
Hot, swollen joint that's difficult to move and a high temperature, or feeling hot or cold and shivery
Joint infection (septic arthritis)
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
joint pain is stopping you doing normal activities or affecting your sleep
the pain or swelling is getting worse or keeps coming back
the pain has not improved after treating it at home for 2 weeks
your joints are stiff for more than 30 minutes after waking up
your child has joint problems
Information:
Refer yourself for back or joint
help
In many areas you may be able to get help, such as physiotherapy, from NHS community musculoskeletal (MSK) services without needing a referral from a GP.
Get NHS help for back or joint problems
Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have joint pain and the skin around it is swollen and feels hot
you have joint pain and feel generally unwell, have a high temperature or feel hot, cold or shivery
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if:
you have very bad joint pain after a fall or injury
you're unable to walk or put weight on a joint
your joint has moved out of place
you have any tingling or you have no feeling in the area around the joint after an injury
How you can ease joint pain
There are some things you can do to ease joint pain.
Do
try to rest the affected joint if you can
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a towel on the painful area for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
speak to a pharmacist or GP about which painkiller to take for your joint pain
try to lose weight if you're overweight
eat a healthy, balanced diet and exercise regularly
Don’t
do not completely stop moving the affected joint
do not smoke
Treatments for joint pain
Treatment for joint pain depends on what's causing it. Sometimes the pain may go away without treatment.
Treatment can include:
strong painkillers
antibiotics if you have an infection
physiotherapy
steroid injections
referral to a hospital for an X-ray, scan or specialist treatment (such as surgery)
advice about making lifestyle changes, such as doing more exercise
Page last reviewed: 26 February 2026
Next review due: 26 February 2029