Shortness of breath
Shortness of breath might not be anything to worry about, but sometimes it can be serious and you'll need to get medical help.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E immediately if:
you have severe difficulty breathing – you’re gasping, choking or not able to get words out
your chest feels tight or heavy
you have pain that spreads to your arms, back, neck and jaw
your lips or skin are turning very pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of the hands
you feel suddenly confused
Find your nearest A&E
Information:
Do not drive to A&E. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.
Bring any medicines you take with you.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E immediately if your child:
has difficulty breathing – they may make grunting noises or suck their stomach in under their ribcage
has lips or skin that are turning very pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of the hands
is suddenly confused (agitated, behaving oddly or crying constantly)
is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do - their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face
Find your nearest A&E
Urgent advice:
Contact NHS 111 if:
you have difficulty breathing – you may be more short of breath than usual
you feel sick or are being sick
you're coughing up blood
you have pain or swelling in 1 of your legs
you have heart palpitations – this may feel like your heart is racing, going too slowly or skipping a beat or like a fluttering feeling in your chest
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your shortness of breath gets worse when you've been doing your normal activities, or when you lie down
you feel short of breath and have swollen ankles
you've been coughing for 3 weeks or more
It's important to get medical advice to make sure it's nothing serious. You're not wasting anyone's time by getting it checked out.
Causes of shortness of breath
Shortness of breath has lots of different causes.
Common causes include:
asthma
a
chest infection
being
overweight
smoking
a
panic attack
But sometimes shortness of breath could be a sign of something more serious, such as:
a lung condition called
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
scarring of the lungs known as
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
heart failure
lung cancer
Any treatment you may need depends on what's causing your symptoms.
Do not try to self-diagnose the cause of shortness of breath – always see a GP.
Information:
Coping with shortness of breath
If you know what's causing your shortness of breath, you can get advice about things you and other people can do to help.
Asthma + Lung UK: living well with breathlessness
Supporting someone with breathlessness website: advice for family, friends and carers of people with COPD or cancer
Page last reviewed: 30 January 2024
Next review due: 30 January 2027